[docs] - Column-level lineage (DOC-157) (#21223)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/concepts/metadata-tags/asset-metadata/column-level-lineage.mdx

---
title: "Column-level lineage | Dagster Docs"
description: "Column lineage enables data and analytics engineers alike to understand how a column is created and used in your data platform."
---

# Column-level lineage

For assets that produce database tables, column-level lineage can be a powerful tool for improving collaboration and debugging issues. Column lineage enables data and analytics engineers alike to understand how a column is created and used in your data platform.

---

## How it works

Emitted as materialization metadata, column lineage can be:

- Specified on assets defined in Dagster
- Enabled for assets loaded from integrations like dbt

Dagster uses this metadata to display the column's upstream and downstream dependencies, accessible via the asset's details page in the Dagster UI.

---

> ## Enabling column lineage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Enabling column-level lineage
```

### For assets defined in Dagster

> To enable column lineage on Dagster assets that produce database tables, you'll need to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable column-level lineage on Dagster assets that produce database tables, you'll need to:
```

> 1. Return a <PyObject object="MaterializeResult" /> object containing a `metadata` parameter

Reviewer: We should mention that the key must be `"dagster/column_lineage"`.

2. In `metadata`, use <PyObject object="TableColumnLineage" displayText="TableColumnLineage.deps_by_column" /> to define a list of columns

> 3. For each column, use <PyObject object="TableColumnDep" /> to define its dependencies. This object accepts `asset_key` and `column_name` arguments, allow you to specify the name of the asset and column that make up the dependency.

Reviewer: To clarify "its"

```suggestion
3. For each column, use <PyObject object="TableColumnDep" /> to define the column's lineage. This object accepts `asset_key` and `column_name` arguments, allow you to specify the name of the asset and column that make up the dependency.
```

            "dagster/column_lineage": TableColumnLineage(
                deps_by_column={
                    "new_column_foo": [
                        TableColumnDep(
                            asset_key=AssetKey("source_bar"),
                            column_name="column_bar",
                        ),
                        TableColumnDep(
                            asset_key=AssetKey("source_baz"),
                            column_name="column_baz",
                        ),
                    ],
                    "new_column_qux": [
                        TableColumnDep(
                            asset_key=AssetKey("source_bar"),
                            column_name="column_quuz",
                        ),
                    ],
                }
            )
        }
    )
```

When materialized, the `my_asset` asset will create two columns: `new_column_foo` and `new_column_qux`.

The `new_column_foo` column is dependent on two other columns:

1. `column_bar` from the `source_bar` asset
2. `column_baz` from the `source_baz` asset

And the second column, `new_column_qux` has is dependent on `column_quuz` from the `source_bar` asset.

> Now, you can view the lineage for these columns in the [Dagster UI](#viewing-column-lineage-in-the-dagster-ui).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, you can view the column-level lineage in the [Dagster UI](#viewing-column-lineage-in-the-dagster-ui).
```

### For assets loaded from integrations

Column-level lineage is currently supported for the dbt integration. Refer to the [dbt documentation](/integrations/dbt/reference/#emit-column-level-metadata-as-materialization-metadata) for more information.

---

> ## Viewing column lineage in the Dagster UI

Reviewer: This is Dagster+ only, so we should mention that

> ## Viewing column lineage in the Dagster UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Viewing column-level lineage in the Dagster UI
```

1. In the Dagster UI, open the **Asset details** page for an asset with column-level lineage enabled.
2. Navigate to the **Overview** tab if it isn't already open.
3. In the **Columns** section, click the **branch** icon in the row of the column you want to view. The icon is on the far right side of the row:

   <!-- ![Highlighted column lineage icon in the Asset details page of the Dagster UI](/images/concepts/metadata-tags/column-lineage-icon.png) -->

   <Image
   alt="Highlighted column lineage icon in the Asset details page of the Dagster UI"
   src="/images/concepts/metadata-tags/column-lineage-icon.png"
   width={905}
   height={193}
   />

> The graph will display the column's asset and column dependencies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The graph will display the column's column dependencies, grouped by asset:
```

<!-- ![Column lineage for a credit_utilization column in the Dagster UI](/images/concepts/metadata-tags/column-level-lineage.png) -->

<Image
alt="Column lineage for a credit_utilization column in the Dagster UI"
src="/images/concepts/metadata-tags/column-level-lineage.png"
width={2640}
height={1276}
/>

To view another column's lineage, click the **Column** dropdown and select another column.

---

> ## APIs in this guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Relevant APIs
```

| Name                                     | Description                                                             |
| ---------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| <PyObject object="asset" decorator />    | A decorator used to define assets.                                      |
| <PyObject object="MaterializeResult" />  | An object representing a successful materialization of an asset.        |
| <PyObject object="TableColumnLineage" /> | Class that defines column outputs to column inputs for a tabular asset. |
| <PyObject object="TableColumnDep" />     | Object that represents a column in an asset.                            |

> 

Reviewer: Could this be higher up? I think "Relevant APIs" should be before "How it works", similar to our other concepts.

Author: I'm actually in the process of moving these down the page for all our concept pages. Some of the pages have tables that are *extremely* long and it requires a lot of scrolling to get to the actual content - I've heard a good amount of feedback that it's fairly disliked.
